1. Cutis. 2006 Apr;77(4 Suppl):27-33.

The effect of Cetaphil Gentle Skin Cleanser on the skin barrier of patients with 
rosacea.

Draelos ZD(1).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Consulting Services, High Point, North Carolina, USA.

A good skin care regimen is a critical part of rosacea treatment; however, care 
must be taken to choose nonirritating products because individuals with rosacea 
tend to have sensitive skin, and irritants can trigger a worsening of symptoms. 
This study examines the use of Cetaphil Gentle Skin Cleanser (a nonalkaline 
nonirritating cleanser) in patients with rosacea. To eliminate the confounding 
effects of various treatments, the cleanser was studied for a 2-week period in 
the absence of rosacea therapy following a 2-week washout period in patients 
with mild to moderate rosacea. During the washout period, patients were asked to 
cleanse twice daily with Dove Sensitive Skin Bar. During the 2-week study 
period, patients were monitored for skin barrier function through transepidermal 
water loss (TEWL) and corneometry; patients also were monitored for rosacea 
severity. Thirty patients were enrolled. No significant increase in TEWL was 
demonstrated at any point during the study, indicating that the gentle skin 
cleanser did not damage the skin barrier. Additionally, the cleanser was shown 
to maintain skin hydration. Furthermore, a post hoc statistical analysis 
suggests there was a significant reduction (P<.05) in investigator-assessed 
rosacea severity on the cheeks, forehead, and nose at the end of week 1 and on 
the cheeks, forehead, and chin at the end of week 2 compared with the end of the 
washout period (after 2 weeks of cleansing with Dove Sensitive Skin Bar). The 
mild nonirritating action of the gentle skin cleanser was supported by the lack 
of adverse events and the tolerability shown in the study. There were no 
increases in erythema, scaling, dryness, stinging, burning, or lack of 
smoothness in the skin during the 2-week study period, despite the fact that 
patients were not being treated for their rosacea during the study. These 
results indicate that Cetaphil Gentle Skin Cleanser may be a good choice for the 
cleansing part of a total rosacea skin care regimen.

PMID: 16706247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]